pdf-to-html/docs/research.md, before:

## Convert PDF to HTML

#### Goal

Convert PDF to HTML in JavaScript from the client

#### Resources

- [PDF Succinctly](https://www.syncfusion.com/succinctly-free-ebooks/pdf)
- Official PDF specs: [https://www.pdfa.org/resource/pdf-specification-index/](https://www.pdfa.org/resource/pdf-specification-index/)

#### Idea 1: use existing PDF to HTML tools

The idea would be to use existing tools to convert from PDF to HTML and then clean up the HTML output for e-Readers.

- [pdf.js](https://mozilla.github.io/pdf.js/) doesn't really convert the PDF to HTML but rather renders the PDF to either a canvas element or SVG, and I don't think either of those would be useful for this project.
- [pdftohtmljs](https://github.com/fagbokforlaget/pdftohtmljs) is JavaScript but unfortunately it's just a shell wrapper for [pdf2htmlEX](https://github.com/coolwanglu/pdf2htmlEX), which is an amazing CLI tool that looks almost exactly like what we'd want and itself is based on the C++ [poppler](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/poppler/poppler) library.
- It looks like [poppler](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/poppler/poppler) itself has built-in `pdftohtml` functionality. We could potentially run poppler in the browser via WebAssembly but there isn't much existing work we could build on top of and this would be a lot of work for output that we'd only need to clean up afterward ...

#### Idea 2: do the work ourselves using a PDF library

Libraries tested:

- [pdf.js](https://mozilla.github.io/pdf.js/)
  - This may do the trick!
  - Seemingly easy access to document text
  - Access to text location and dimensions
  - Text style (bold, italic, etc) can be determined by getting the original font name (https://github.com/mozilla/pdf.js/pull/10753) as of v3.1.81
- [pdf-lib](https://pdf-lib.js.org/)
  - Too limited, no obvious way to get text

Commit message:

docs: PDF.js' HTML output doesn't meet our needs

pdf-to-html/docs/research.md, after:

## Convert PDF to HTML

#### Goal

Convert PDF to HTML in JavaScript from the client

#### Resources

- [PDF Succinctly](https://www.syncfusion.com/succinctly-free-ebooks/pdf)
- Official PDF specs: [https://www.pdfa.org/resource/pdf-specification-index/](https://www.pdfa.org/resource/pdf-specification-index/)

#### Idea 1: use existing PDF to HTML tools

The idea would be to use existing tools to convert from PDF to HTML and then clean up the HTML output for e-Readers.

- [pdf.js](https://mozilla.github.io/pdf.js/) doesn't really convert the PDF to HTML but rather renders the PDF to either a canvas element or SVG, and I don't think either of those would be useful for this project.
  - PDF.js does have some ability to convert the text to formatted output; this is used to overlay the rendered PDF with text for highlighting/searching/etc. Unfortunately I don't think this will be useful either; for example, [it adds a `<br>` at the end of every EOL](https://github.com/mozilla/pdf.js/blob/2c39a739f552faa914b4f6e20a4274e6578cf0cd/src/display/text_layer.js#L413-L414). Also, since it relies on the output of `getTextContent` I don't think it will include bold/italic formatting.
- [pdftohtmljs](https://github.com/fagbokforlaget/pdftohtmljs) is JavaScript but unfortunately it's just a shell wrapper for [pdf2htmlEX](https://github.com/coolwanglu/pdf2htmlEX), which is an amazing CLI tool that looks almost exactly like what we'd want and itself is based on the C++ [poppler](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/poppler/poppler) library.
- It looks like [poppler](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/poppler/poppler) itself has built-in `pdftohtml` functionality. We could potentially run poppler in the browser via WebAssembly but there isn't much existing work we could build on top of and this would be a lot of work for output that we'd only need to clean up afterward ...

In the end, this would be really tempting, but I don't think it would be worth any effort implementing this ourselves (e.g. setting up the WebAssembly compilation), especially not knowing what the end output would be and how useful it would be. It would be interesting to explore but it could be much more effort than idea 2 with a strong chance that none of the code could be reused (e.g. if we convert docx files or complex HTML files to simple HTML files for e-Readers).

#### Idea 2: do the work ourselves using a PDF library

Libraries tested:

- [pdf.js](https://mozilla.github.io/pdf.js/)
  - This may do the trick!
  - Seemingly easy access to document text
  - Access to text location and dimensions
  - Text style (bold, italic, etc) can be determined by getting the original font name (https://github.com/mozilla/pdf.js/pull/10753) as of v3.1.81
- [pdf-lib](https://pdf-lib.js.org/)
  - Too limited, no obvious way to get text
